A low-abundance form of water, H<sub>2</sub><sup>17</sup>O, was enriched from 0.04% to ∼90% by slow evaporation and fractional distillation of tap water. The density and refractive index for H<sub>2</sub><sup>17</sup>O are reported. Gas chromatography−mass spectrometry (GC-MS) of <sup>16</sup>O- and <sup>17</sup>O-1-hexanols and their trimethyl silyl ethers and of <sup>16</sup>O- and <sup>17</sup>O-hexamethyl disiloxanes was used to determine the percentage of <sup>17</sup>O enrichment in the H<sub>2</sub><sup>17</sup>O. Furthermore, the chemical shifts of labeled and nonlabeled water dissolved in CDCl<sub>3</sub> differed sufficiently that we could verify the enrichment of H<sub>2</sub><sup>17</sup>O. <sup>17</sup>O hexanol was synthesized by the reaction of iodohexane with Na<sup>17</sup>OH. <sup>17</sup>O-Labeled trimethylsilanol and <sup>17</sup>O-labeled hexamethyldisiloxane were prepared by the reaction of H<sub>2</sub><sup>17</sup>O with bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA). To generate standards for <sup>17</sup>O NMR, H<sub>2</sub><sup>17</sup>O<sub>2</sub>, and <sup>17</sup>O camphor were prepared. H<sub>2</sub><sup>17</sup>O was electrolyzed to form <sup>17</sup>O-labeled hydrogen peroxide which was quantified using two colorimetric assays. <sup>17</sup>O-Labeled camphor was prepared by exchanging the ketone oxygen of camphor using H<sub>2</sub><sup>17</sup>O. The <sup>17</sup>O-labeled compounds were characterized using <sup>17</sup>O, <sup>1</sup>H, and <sup>13</sup>C NMR and GC-MS. While we were characterizing the labeled camphor, we also detected an unexpected oxygen exchange reaction of primary alcohols, catalyzed by electrophilic ketones such as camphor. The reaction is a displacement of the alcohol OH group by water. This is an example of the usefulness of <sup>17</sup>O NMR in the study of a reaction mechanism that has not been noticed previously.
